---
layout: events
title: Special Issue
description: "SI: The Role of Artificial Intelligence for Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion"
img: /assets/img/events/2026.10.31_si_mdpi.jpeg
imgalt: "Flyer of Special issue on The Role of Artificial Intelligence for Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (Information MPDI journal). Provide details on the Special Issue."
importance: 1
category: call for papers
dates:
    day: 2026.10.31
location: Information (MPDI)
website: https://www.mdpi.com/journal/information/special_issues/Y7H8YYZDTV
related_publications: false
---

Artificial intelligence (AI) has emerged as a transformative force across various sectors, influencing decision-making processes, shaping societal norms, and impacting economic landscapes. Despite AI technologies continuing to evolve and integrate deeper into our daily lives, in recent years, concerns about AI bias and fairness have gained significant attention from researchers, policymakers, and industry leaders alike. Studies have shown that AI systems can perpetuate and amplify societal biases in their training data, leading to discriminatory outcomes across various domains, including employment, healthcare, and criminal justice. Despite these challenges, AI also holds tremendous potential to advance DEI objectives. The possibilities are vast, from developing AI-driven tools to mitigate bias in hiring processes to leveraging AI for personalized education and healthcare. This special issue aims to investigate the role of AI technologies in addressing and contributing to diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) aspects.

We invite submissions that explore, but are not limited to, the following topics:

* Bias and Fairness: Methods and techniques for detecting and mitigating bias in AI models and technologies.
* Data Diversity and Representation: Strategies for enhancing diversity in training datasets.
* Ethical AI Development: Frameworks and guidelines for developing AI systems that adhere to ethical principles, including transparency, accountability, and privacy.
* Explainable AI (XAI): Techniques for enhancing the interpretability and explainability of AI models to promote trust and understanding among diverse stakeholders.
* AI for Accessibility: Innovations in using AI to develop assistive technologies that enhance accessibility for people with disabilities, including natural language processing, computer vision, and gesture recognition.
* Human–AI Collaboration: Studies on designing AI systems that facilitate inclusive collaboration between humans and machines, considering diverse user needs and perspectives.
* Inclusive User Interface Design: Methods for designing AI-powered user interfaces that are accessible and inclusive, considering diverse user abilities and preferences.
* AI-driven Social Network Analysis: Applications of AI in analyzing social networks to understand and address DEI-related issues, such as online harassment, echo chambers, and social polarization.

We encourage researchers and practitioners in computer science to contribute to this special issue by submitting original research papers, survey articles, and case studies. By advancing our understanding of the role of AI in promoting diversity, equity, and inclusion through rigorous computer science research, we can pave the way for the development of more ethical, inclusive, and trustworthy AI systems. Submissions will undergo a thorough peer review process, ensuring the highest quality and relevance to the special issue's theme.

Marco Rospocher<br/>
Guest Editor

[Full detauls](https://www.mdpi.com/journal/information/special_issues/Y7H8YYZDTV)
